---
name: Founder Stories
---

# Founder Stories

For as long as I can remember, I have loved cutting corners. Nothing beats the
feeling of achieving something while putting in substantially less effort than
others. Some use the expression *working smarter, not harder* to describe this
process, but this phrase has never really cut it for me. Cutting corners is not
about working less: it's about achieving results faster, more creative, more
ambitious, and less wasteful.


## Survival of the Clumsiest

Looking back, I would probably argue that my love for cutting corners was born
out of plain survival. As a kid, my development was already marked by
contradictions. While I could already read and write before attending primary
school, my motoric skills were equally exceptionally weak. 

In practice, this meant that I could not manage to hold a pen in the proper way.
This made writing by hand slow and even physically painful for me. As a coping
strategy, I quickly developed the habit to minimize the activity as much as
possible and if possible avoid the activity altogether.

Many a teacher felt that it was her calling to help me overcome this handicap.
Every tool at their disposal, was used to introduce me to the wonders of the
pen: special caps, rewarding stickers, public jest and ridicule. 

Nothing worked. I remained true to myself. I already developed a way to write.
Why waste precious time and effort on learning another one?


## The Template of Doom

Soon after I discovered the word 'idem', it became the most frequently used word
on my tests. Why write something twice, if once suffices?  Idem felt like a
magic word. Better yet, it felt as a command that held special powers.

Not coincidently, I discovered computers and programming around the same time.
Loops enabled me not even having to repeat the act of writing the word 'idem'
anymore. 

```basic
10 print "Yeehaa Was Here!!!!!"
20 goto 10
```

This discovery made me question everything I learned in school thus far. Why
perform repetive tasks when machines can do them for us?  

The power to delegate boring, repetive tasks to machines manages to impress me
until this very day.  Why don't we use it a lot more?


## Just Passing By

Above anything else,it was the dire boredom of high school that shaped my
dispositon to cut corners into a skill. 5.5 &mdash; the minimum passing grade in
the Dutch education system &mdash; was my favorite number. It proved that I put
just the right amount of effort in learning things that were not going to be
useful later on. 

In fact, my first year' high school teachers were so troubled by my lack of
interests in the curriculum that they decided to hold me back even though my
grades were sufficient to pass to the next year. Their official explanation said
the following:

> Jan Hein hardly has interest in his school work. We find him too involved in
> his extracurricular activities.

And that was a completely accurate assessment. 

If only they would have understood it as a reflection of their own performance. 


## Motivation Slips

School failed me. Most teachers were completely unable to motivate me. 

Matters were further complicated, however, by the fact that I was far from your
typical underachiever. I was reading Dostojewsky by 12, president of both the
student parliament and the news paper, and joined a national political party by
15. But for all the things that I could not see the reason behind, cutting
corners became the only way of life. 

I was willing to make an effort whenever something made sense to me, but
blatantly refused to do them when it didn't. Mandatory attendence and
punctuality were two of the things that I couldn't wrap my head around. 

When my school tried to introduce a system of hallway permission slips, I
succesfully sabotaged its introduction by printing their template sheet in the
school paper. 

Best thing was, that I did so with explicit permission from the dean. He even
provided me with the official template. How did manage to convince him? Simple.
I told him that the article that I wrote about the new system would benefit from
a visual illustration... 

...and I promised to invalidate the template by putting another magic word  on it. 

```
SPECIMEN
```

Which I did! This word that renders real things fake was clearly included on one out of four slips.


## Digital Native 

Understanding the corner cutting powers of computers gave me a competitive
advantage. I was digital native in the stone age of computers. A fact that I was
all too eager to rub under everyone's noses at the time.

In the third grade, I lost my computer room key privileges after a friend and I
alphabetized all the keys on all the 30 or  IBM Model M's in the class room. 

```
QWERTYUIOP         ABCDEFGHIJ
ASDFGHJKL          KLMNOPQRS
ZXCVBNM            TUVWXYZ
```

This was one of the few times in high school that I didn't cut any corners. The
task would take us a whole afternoon. But it proved to be well worth the effort.
The next day, all computer classes were disrupted. No student learned to use
WordPerfect or Lotus123 that day. 

At the time, my peers were far from digital native. It turned out that they
hadn't even entered the age of the typewriter. Was I to blame for their
discomfort? Up until this very day, I maintain that it's debatable.


## Lazy Santa

Even family events were not exempt from my striving to do more with less. I
think the following example tells the entire story. 

I once gave my mother a basket of old, dirty laundry as a present. I know what
you are thinking, but even I am not that mean. It was part of a dutch tradition
in which Secret Santas makes mocking gift for each other. This practice consists
of a lot of arts and crafting, but that's something I never understood or
appreciated. For me, the whole purpose of the tradition was the mocking. The
better the joke, the better the present.

At the time, my mother just went back to art school and was constantly
complaining about her domestic tasks. So what better present than to give her
some relief from her chores? 

A week before the holiday, I wrapped up the laundry basket in wrapping paper.earlier By Sinterklaas Evening, everyone had been complaining about
missing socks and panties for days.

Was my lack of effort bad? I would strongly argue against it. 

I don't think any other Sinterklaas gift has ever made as much of an impression
in our family.  Everyone still talks about it every year eventhough this
happened decades ago. The annecdote has been passed on to the next generation?
Would more time and effort have lead to equal, let alone better, results?


## The Eternal Recurrence of the Same

My attitude got a complete overwaul when I got to university. Philosophy was my
biggest passion at the time, and slacking became less of a goal as such.
Instead, my corner cutting activities were now aimed at achieving more, not
doing less.

Most of the classes offered did not go deep and fast enough for my taste. So I
approached professors with an alternative proposal. Instead of attending their
class, I would write a paper related to the subject. Saving them of the time and
energy of having to deal with a highly critical in their classroom. Don't
remember any professor that ever refused my offer. 

Nor did anyone of them ever notice that I recycled up to 80% of earlier papers. 

[KITTLER]

## Social Justice Warrior

2006, a university teacher now, I was never inclined to reward other students for
effort either. The grades that I gave were based on the results achieved, not
the time that it took them to get there.  At times, I even thought of grading
systems that penalized superfluous use of time and effort.

This lead to plenty of complaints from hardworking students: 

> It's not fair!   
> I worked 40 hours on my paper    
> And he did it in only two    

Up to the present day, I don't think this argument even justifies an answer. The
complaint truly does not make any sense to me.


## Please Underwhelm Me

Academia was never the right environment to appreciate my antischolarly mindset
anyways. Even the fact that I had the secretary making photocopies was met with
great suspicion. How stupid of me to think that there were tasks that could be
delegated to people that were hired to do them.

But at the time, academia's disdain of efficiency didn't discourage me yet. It
actually fed directly into my particular brand of OCD. Higher education and
research is filled with opportunities to cut corners, especially since it's
considered a vice to do so. 

Among the experiments that I conducted, these were some of the most
controversial:

+ Splitting a large seminar in two groups. Only offering each group a bi-weekly
session.

+ Peer feedback and grading of exams and papers.


## Subhuman Resources

But an assistant professor is illpositioned to change the system, so I
signed up to become the Humanities department's HR Manager as a side-hustle.

My first task was to facilitate the roll-out of the newly introduced mandatory
teaching certificate to the existing teaching staff. Asked how to assess such a
great diversity of experience, my immediate answer went along the following
lines

> Don't!   
> Just give the certificate to them    
> Some of them have been teaching for over 20 years    
> They have proven their skills already   
> And, if not, they are not gonna improve them anymore

And while everyone pretended to be appalled by the suggestion, we actually ended
up rolling out something only nominally more substantial. It was the right thing
to do.


## Out of Place, Out of Time

Despite these successes, however, I never felt very confident in my role.  The
cocktail of a hyperly optimizing mindset and an environment heavily reluctant to
be subjected to it, had been doomed from the start. In 2012, my inevitable
burn/bore out became a fact.

It could not come at a better time, since it allowed me to reconnect with a lost
love. The early 2010's, marked a true renaissance of computer literacy. And I
passionately wanted to be part of it. Ruby impressed me with it's clear syntax
and it's thinking man's mentality. While the creative coding and data
visualization community showed me that research no longer needed to be textual.

Most importantly, though, The coding community was also the first environment
that shared my cutting corners mentality. When I first discovered that the three
great virtues of a programmer were *laziness, hybris, and impatience* I could
not have been happier. 

So I plotted a career shift. Signed up for a coding bootcamp, and went for San
Francisco in 2013. However, I soon managed to cut some corners there too. After
two weeks of being a student, Dev Bootcamp promoted me to teacher/tutor for the
rest of the summer. Plans changed, instead of shifting career, why not bring
these insights back to revolutionize my old one. Maybe I took 'hybris' a bit too literal?

Back at the University of Amsterdam, I believed that my newfound coding
superpowers would revitalise my academic career. Coding the Humanities was a
secret attempt to mobilize all the former dreamers and slackers into my classroom
into an army of creative coders. It worked, until it didn't.

Offcourse was born out of my conviction that education should all be about
corner cutting. A global community of learners that didn't want to waste their
talent by engaging in month long programs and degrees. Instead, we tried to
break down to its most basic building blocks: simple todo lists of practical
tasks. Teaching them to eliminate the repetitive one function at a time.

Students were amazing. More surprisingly, administration was very supportive
too. Only problem were these same colleagues that complained about the copying.
To them, the idea of automating tasks clashed with their scholastic romanticism.
The mere idea of a computer that could release them of the boring parts and
insult to their very existence.


## Offcourse

Quit my job, took a couple of students with me. We are in Edtech now. But hey,
founding a startup is not difficult enough, so let's make it a value-driven,
opensource, nonprofit foundation too. 

But at least the ethical angle differentiated my activities from all others.
Waag asked me to help with this new coalition of public institution that they
were founding: Public Spaces. Apparently there was a demand for an ethical
internet. Problem, however, no one knew were to find it or how to start it. Was
I willing to help them with that?

So we're doing consultancy now? Shifting my attention to these new projects

Planet B / Bots with An Attitude

But through all of this, there is this lurking feeling that there is still an
amazing company in me somewhere. Something that brings all these things
together. Or better yet, an company that starts to eliminate all these
unnecessay laborous tasks one by one. **Cuthooks**: systematically cutting
corners since 2020.


## Learnings

Turns out that a life of corner cutting does not lead to a shorter journey after
all.

But no regrets! That's the price of learning. Question is, what lessons did I
learn. I'd say the following:

+ People need to be familiarized with the idea that cutting corners is a good
thing. We are told from a very early age that we have to suffer through laborous
tasks to succeed. In fact, our whole education system is build on this idea, It
needs a fair amount of unlearning before we can progress as a species.

+ Only optimize professional practices that are open to the idea of change.
Don't worry about the rest. They will perish soon anyways.

+ Start with low hanging fruit. There are still so many unnecessary, boring
tasks that could be automated that are now done manually, that we may not even
have the desire to automate the high hanging fruit once we get there.

+ Mechanization and automation have only produced more jobs over the last 200
years, and will continue to do so. They mostly took over tasks that were close
to slavery anyways. If anything, robotics and AI will make us more human.

+ Technology is still full of untapped potential. No Google or Facebook is
going to be close to fully utilize it any time soon. Creative tactics will
always win from all-encompassing strategies.

+ The future of AI will be local and contextual. Understanding irony should be
the new Turing Test. As long as there is no general AI that can capture all
winks and jokes  under all circumstances, there will be plenty of ways out of
surveillance capitalism. Lighten up folks!
