[template](https://www.inc.com/entrepreneurs-organization/3-powerful-steps-to-write-your-brand-story.html)


1. Past, Present, and Future

For as long as I can remember, I have loved cutting corners. There is no better
feeling than completing a laborous task in substantially less time than others.
*Working Smarter, Not Harder* some people call it nowadays. But this expression
has never really done it for me. Cutting corners is not about working less: it's
about being faster, more creative, more innovative, and less wasteful.

More than anything else, the boredom of high school shaped this innate
dispositon into a skill. The 5.5 (the minimum passing grade in the Dutch system)
was my favorite grade. It showed that I put just the right amount of effort in
learning things that were not going to be useful later on. Soon after I
discovered the word 'idem', it became the most frequently used word on my tests.  

It's around the same time, I first discovered my love for computers and
programming. Loops enabled me not even having to repeat the act of writing
the word 'idem' anymore. 

```basic
10 print "Yeehaa Was Here!!!!!"
20 goto 10
```

As a teacher, I was never prone to reward effort either. The grades that I gave,
were based on the results achieved, not the time that it took them to get there.
At times, I even tought of grading systems that penalized superfluous use of
time and effort.

This lead, of course, to plenty of complaints from students: 'It's not fair! I
worked 40 hours on my paper, and he did it in only two". Up to the present day,
I don't think this argument even justifies an answer. It does not make any
sense to me.

Academia was never the right environment to appreciate my antischolarly mindset
anyways. Even the fact that I had the secretary making photocopies was met with
great suspicion. How stupid of me to think that they were tasks that could be
outsourced.

But at the time, that didn't discourage me yet. On the contrary, academia's
disdain of efficiency actually fed directly into my particular brand of OCD.
That world is filled with opportunities to cut corners, exactly since it's considered a vice to do so. 

But an assistant professor is not well positioned to change the system, so I
signed up to become the Humanities department's HR Manager as a side-hustle.

My first task was to facilitate the roll-out of the newly introduced mandatory
teaching certificate to the existing teaching staff. Asked how to assess such a
great diversity of experience, my immediate answer was something like this: 

> "Don't. Just give the certificate to them. Some of them have been teaching for
> over 20 years, they have proved their skills. And, if not, they are not gonna
> change it anymore."

And while everyone pretended to be appalled by the suggestion, we ended up
rolling out something only nominally more substantial. 

Despite these successes, however, I never felt very confident in my role.  The
cocktail of a hyperly optimizing mindset and an environment heavily reluctant to
be subjected to it, had been doomed from the start. In 2012, my inevitable
burn/bore out became a fact.

It could not come at a better time, since it allowed me to reconnect with a lost
love. The early 2010's, marked a true renaissance of computer literacy. And I
passionately wanted to be part of it. Ruby impressed me with it's clear syntax
and it's thinking man's mentality.

The coding community was also the first environment that shared my cutting
corners mentality. When I first discovered that the three great virtues of a
programmer were "laziness, hybris, and impatience", I could not be happier. 

So I considered a career shift. Signed up for Dev Bootcamp, and went for San
Francisco in 2013. However, teaching was not done with me. After two weeks of
being a student, Dev Bootcamp approached me to be a teacher/tutor instead. 


2. Brand Statement

Work should be fun, creative, and productive. There is absolutely no honor in
performing labourous task that could be automated.


3. Brand Story
